# arabidopsis_clock_growth_model
Circadian rhythms are endogenous physiological processes that mirror diurnal environmental periodicity and persist in the absence of environmental cues (McClung 2006). These rhythmic processes are driven by the circadian clock, an endogenous timekeeper that  is ubiquitous in nature and responsible for generating and maintaining 24 hour rhythms. Circadian clocks allow organisms to synchronize temporal phases of physiology with environmental cycles in order to ensure optimal timing of biological events on both daily and seasonal time scales (Covington et al., 2001). External light and temperature cues set the core molecular oscillator to local conditions. (Thines and Harmon 2010).   In plants, the circadian clock contributes to photoperiodic control over growth and development, to plant response to abiotic stress, as well as to coordinating genome-wide changes in transcription (McClung 2006). Recent work in Arabidopsis thaliana has demonstrated that plants that have a circadian oscillator matched to the environmental period exhibit higher overall biomass, elevated rates of photosynthesis, and improved chances of survival in a mixed population. Thus, the presence of a robust circadian clock can increase competitive advantage and elevate plant fitness (Dodd et al., 2005). Elucidating the architectural structure of this clock mechanism and other clock regulated pathways has important implications for our overall understanding of plant growth and development.   Recent advances in computational and experimental studies of the circadian clock in  Arabidopsis thaliana have led to new models of the clock gene network that include a three-component repressilator circuit (Pokhilko et al., 2012). This new circadian clock model of Pokhilko et al. (2012) suggests that the plant clock functions as an integrated, multi-feedback system that maintains robust oscillations and entrainment under multiple perturbations.   The main objective of this master’s thesis will be to integrate the model developed by Pokhilko et al. (2013) with one developed by Cristina Nieto et al. (2021) for modeling light and temperature cues in hypocotyl elongation. This is possible as hypocotyl elongation is subject to photoperiodic regulation by the circadian clock through PIF4 and PIF5 (phytochrome interacting factors) transcription (Seaton et al., 2015). The integration of these two models would allow us to take a holistic approach to understanding the circadian clock through its interaction in output pathways. Further simulation and analysis of this coupled model would highlight the underlying molecular mechanisms that coordinate plant growth across changing conditions and may provide insights into the overall contribution of the clock to plant fitness. Future advancements in this area may in turn enable one to engineer aspects of plant physiology for improved growth in both existing and new environments (Seaton et al., 2015).   Understanding how the circadian clock interacts with and regulates other biological processes is not only important for basic biology but also because the oscillator influences traits like growth and stress responses that have direct agronomic importance (Kim et al., 2017). Utilization of computational models will help uncover many of the mechanisms in the signaling network that contribute to these massive changes in protein levels and their associated downstream physiological effects and how they vary given different environmental conditions. This proposed project of integrating the hypocotyl elongation pathway with the clock model would leverage computational tools to better understand how a systems behavior emerges from lower level mechanisms and structures – a recurrent problem in biology today.
